# Seminar Essay

## Abstract

My abstracts go here.

View abstract 1 [here] 

![] (ABSTRACT 1. docx)

View abstract 2 [here] 

![] (ABSTRACT 2. docx)

## Essay

Here is my essay.



# FINAL PROJECT

## Essay Presentation

Read Essay here [here]

![] (PORTRAYING SAMUEL BECKETT’S WAITING FOR GODOT IN DIGITAL NON-LINEAR (NON-REALIST) TWINE TEXTS
Soji Cole
6610091
01/06/2021
 
Introduction

The ultimate vision behind any dramatic text is to be produced in a theatre for an audience. This ambition animates the literary vision of the author as well as enhance a form of interactivity between the characters and the audience. In this regard, meaning becomes more significant and can be processed in multifarious ways. In the new digital age, literary texts are also being subjected to digital interpretations in which meaning is not only modeled in multiple dimension, but the audience also becomes part of the story. This digital re-creation does not dismantle the potency of the author and the story, but rather reinforces ways in which information is processed and meanings are derived. Using Twine as an interactive storytelling digital tool, this study attempts to create a non-linear digital visualization of Samuel Beckett’s play; Waiting for Godot. By using the Twine digital tool, the study aims at considering a transformation of a rather condensed text into an interactive fiction in which visual flowcharts (textbox) takes the place of conventional textual scripting.


The Twine tool, as a digital note serves in many ways to preserve the inherent literary quality of the text. Though it is built as a form of game, its affordances are substantially text-based. By this, heavy graphical illustration makes it unwieldy and therefore uncustomary to its use. This dictate corresponds to the traditional convention of written literature in which the popularity of the texts is as important as the story in the book. This prospect also informs the choice of the selected text, Waiting for Godot; a canonical text in which the text is regarded to have notoriously overwhelmed the ‘imagined’ actions. The study suggests that a Twine visualization of the drama does not only serve to decongest the heavy-laden textual format of the book, it also serves as a means for the audience to derive meanings which are both personal and as well as all-inclusive. The hypothesis proceeds from a conscious understanding that intersection of knowledge in both text and digital formats is likely to produce multiple figurations as well as all-embracing understanding of literary materials to serve the need of both author and audience. By the characteristics of the Twine digital interactive form, which align to both textual and gaming processual qualities, Waiting for Godot can be read as both a close and distant textual object; a cognitive advantage in the multimodal processing of information. Adam Hammond, Julian Brooke and Graeme Hirst, have referred to this kind of view as “…a hybrid approach that places distant and close reading in a reciprocal dialogue, based on the conviction that each stands to benefit from the perspective that the other has to offer” (53). Thus, in the Twine narrativization, Waiting for Godot becomes a playable game as well as an object of learning.


Realist vs. Non-Realist textual (literary) representation

Most written dramas, even the 20th century canonical play texts have been conceived in a realist fashion. The story, characters, and plots are always linear and familiar to readers in a coherent sense. Realist textual representation is fashioned in such characteristics as to the readers perceiving the world directly as it is written in the text. In contrast, non-realist representation would direct perception to understanding the world by the ideas and interpretation of the audience. Waiting for Godot, a play which belongs to the virulent 20th century avant-garde absurdist category, shatters the realist tendencies with its cyclical plots, fragmented storylines, inconsistent characters and abstract actions. In this case, meanings are derived from associated metaphoric images. This condition opens the play to digital experiments in which meanings and narrative can be interactively multimodal.
This overview does not attempt to discuss the historiography of ideological transformation in realist and non-realist literature or relate the advantage of one ontological perspective to the other, but rather to suggest that written dramas could be interpreted and understood via digital corpus. In this way, textual stories are subjected to diverse meanings and interpretations which will in turn enrich the phenomenological experiences of the reader. While post-structuralist literary writers have done extensive work in dismantling the logic of realism, most of the attempts have in themselves been fashioned in realist modes. This has further affirm the basis of conflict between realism and non-realism in literature as the notion of intra-textual representation vs. extra-textual reality. Non-realism is regarded as radical aesthetic, one in which deconstruction strives to undermine conventional reflection. It is a kind of utopian imagination aimed to enhance radical choices. These choices are foregrounded in the 21st century by the implementation of digital tools. Katherines Hayles mentions that; “The most important aesthetic trend today is not the development of ever more sophisticated techniques of deconstruction, or even more radical montages of political images in some unique art works, but the exploration and consolidation of those more democratic forms of cultural expression and interaction which the new technologies of mass production are providing” (68).


A portrait of Hope and Despair: brief analysis of Waiting for Godot

Samuel Beckett’s play Waiting for Godot is a story about two elderly tramps, Estragon and Vladimir, who sit on country road, waiting and talking in front of a lone tree. They amuse themselves with talks that alternate between hope and despair as they expectantly wait for a man; a kind of harbinger of goodwill called Godot. The only people who pass by; Lucky, Pozzo, and a boy, are caricatures of both characters; people who are wandering about in quest of their own redemption. The whole play revolves around the anticipation of the arrival of Godot. But he never arrives. The imagined figure of the non-existent character, Godot, has been notoriously difficult to interpret by all those who have studied the play. While some attributes the character to God/Jesus, others have suggested a more existential and political attribution of his identity. In the play which is divided into two acts, so many things were done yet nothing gets done. This notion aptly describes the sly incongruities and absurdities of the play, as characterized by metaphors which are inscribed through dialogues and stage directions. For instance, the play opens with:
        Estragon: (giving up again).  Nothing to be done. (1)
Eric Levy states that, “Perhaps the most enigmatic play of this century is Waiting for Godot” (18). That meaning of enigma runs through the course of the entire play. At the close of Act 1, the situation remains cyclical:
“Estragon: Well, shall we go? 
 Vladimir: Yes, let's go. 
 They do not move”. (85)
The play is fertile in symbol, such that the complexity of ideas and action in it has often been understood through the framework of other ideas. In the final lines of the play, the complexity remains; the characters progressively waits in futility while perpetuating the reassurance of frustration over hope.
Vladimir: Well? Shall we go?
Estragon: Yes, let's go. 
They do not move. 
Curtain. (163)
The comic overtone embeds the many reality of life in the play. We laugh, we play, and we revel in our inanities, only to turn around and experience our foibles, limitation and adversity – the essence of our humanness. We tend to gradually wait and grow in the reasoning that life will offer us hope to counter its intricacies. This paradoxical aesthetic makes the play one of the most profound modern English dramas. In a drama suffused with repetitive rhetoric in terms of characters’ actions and dialogues, dramatic movement is accentuated by the indefinite ambiguity of the characters in playing true to the explicit dictates of the dialogue, and rebelling against it. Therefore, geospatial analysis of movements becomes a meaningful tool in the further interpretation and study of the play. This nuanced features underscore the non-realist model of the play, thus a pliable material for non-realist digital interpretation.


Re-presenting Waiting for Godot in digital Twine text

With the aesthetic revolution of modern industrial design and the acceleration towards a fundamental human AI era, the future of the reading text might depend substantially on digital archives. In other words, the world of literature will profoundly experience the opportunity of digital textuality. This opportunity means that readers cannot only write the stories but also transform into interacting with the world of the story. “This transformation of meaning is especially potent when the words reflexively interact with the inscription technologies that produce them” (Hayles 24). This prototypical experiment suggests a multiple structure of interfaces—between a user and the computer, and between defining a literary text via digital reading to creating a new reading environment. In this environment, meanings are created not only via text, but by many possibilities inherent in the process. Johanna Drucker (2018) suggests that social meaning should be (is) derived from experiential and aesthetic interpretation of many possibilities which are in co-dependence and constitutive relationalities with each other.  Simply put, meanings can be attributed to texts via multimodal and interactive expressions. Ferdinand de Saussaure’s (1983) intervention in semiotics also proposes that meaning occurs in the exchange of signs. Inferential hypothesis can thus be engaged in deciphering roles and meanings in the overall comprehension of texts.
The analysis of the Twine experiment of Waiting for Godot directs attention to the storyline and the geospatial evolution of the dialogues of the characters. Since movement is cyclical and nothing really gets done in the drama except waiting, the Twine analysis demonstrates a kind of recursive and abstruse engagement of linear motion by characters in the play. However, the visual textbox convey the story as vividly as it could, and as such, readers can contextualize their personal meanings from the project by following the story and processing the visual. This makes information processing both liberal and subjective. Though it does not exhaust the interpretation of the drama and its material features, it provides useful digital storytelling category which is a good place to start. The emphasis here, though sketchy, can prompt the understanding that one of the latent potentials of digital reading of textual materials might be to dismantle some of the opaqueness associated with difficult texts. As interpretation becomes more subjective, also, ”In turn, the tool exposes digital objects to modernist subjects, revealing their status not as realist referents to objective truth, but rather interpretive objects that invite a plurality of humanist visions” (Alex Christie et al 103).
The conception of this project is to allow readers generate diverse mental images of the text. The democratic affordances of Twine allows users to focus on both the text and the technology, thus the resulting production is a network of semiotic modes from which both literal and alternative imagery of Waiting for Godot can be produced. This example goes to demonstrate that digital pedagogy can be as stimulating as well as enriching. This also renders the text and its story as a product of agential networks. Drucker (2013) buttresses this by stating that, “This shift from an approach grounded in what something is to how something works changes the analysis of material evidence from iconographic reading to indexical reading, leading us into the lifecycle of production, use, control, resource consumption, labor, cost, environmental impact and so on — so that an artifact’s materiality is read as a snapshot moment within continuous interdependent systems” (11). It can be argued that the Twine tool would lead to a paradigmatic shift in digital reading of texts, and would spur renewed scholarly interest in the subject of close reading (which is important as the same interest in watching a film adapted from a book and going back to read the book), so as complement rather than defy distant reading in the era of big data. Twine thus become a form of interactive fiction database for material texts. The modelling in this experiment takes a somewhat abstruse text and unspool it in a visual-textual content, creating an environment of liberal episteme where readers even feel that reading than be conceived as a game (one of the technical logic of Twine). In reality, and by the nature of its design, “Some people like to think of using Twine as writing interactive stories and other people structure their projects more like games” (Melissa Ford 2). The twine modeling aspires to the expressive aims of the dramatic story and its interaction with the reader. It diversifies the narrative aspect of the story and enlivens it with a deep sense of pathos. In effect, the Twine modelling of Waiting for Godot creates a deeply human portrait of expectation, despair, and hope which are all a cyclical nuances of the reality of human experiences, and which are depicted in the original text.
In the sample prototype created, we can see the instantiation of the complexity of movements. The textboxes do not entirely progress in a linear fashion, but in a recursive interconnectedness. This typically exhibits the sedentary nature of the play itself and the beauty of the Twine non-linear affordances, where lack of meaningful linear development and movement is completely overshadowed by the beauty of recurring linking actions. With this, literary works can thus be read in a chain of linking networks which count to break the linearity of the conventional book. By possessing linking mechanism, Twine is also classified as a form of hypertext tool. Blabla bla states that, “…narrative is a linear, causal sequence of events whose significance depends on their position on a temporal axis, while hypertext is a network of textual fragments that can be read in many different orders” (Marie-Laure Ryan 44). This notion of hypertext demonstrates cognitive approaches to reading Waiting for Godot in a multicursal pathways which accommodate multiple possibilities for its narrative. This will not only serve as a digital alternative to the reading text, but also ensure some form of interactivity between the text and the reader. In historiographic context, early literary hypertext followed an avant-garde essence which seeks to undermine textual order and linear narrative development by providing readers with fragmented and subjective reading experiences, aimed at producing personalized receptive processes. The development in technology and computer design has heightened the receptive processes of texts to the level where Shawna Ross suggests that, “Their processes and outputs influence what emerges as knowable and what counts as proof, bending modernist texts and modernism itself toward our contemporary machinic episteme” (2). Digital reading and writing tools like Twine has become one of the contemporary modes of generating knowledge from machine.


Disciplinary boundary, digital humanities and knowledge ecotone

The Twine tool is a digital tool that is enhanced by diverse algorithms from the humanities and science (technology) disciplinary areas. This kind of interdisciplinary relationship has been limited by boundaries which are created to maintain the purity of some disciplines. More than any other disciplines, the science disciplines are notorious for creating boundaries around itself. The concept of interdisciplinary engagement is therefore tedious and limiting in the case where it becomes possible. While interdisciplinarity has its limitations, the discipline of digital humanities has shown that it is more liberating and productive in the general consideration of its impact on research and humanity. In such circumstance, a fresh knowledge ecotone is created for the benefit of all the disciplines that have come together. For instance, the Twine experiment here renders a rich ecotone, not only for a non-realist intervention of the texts, but also for the modernist ideals as it ventilates and preserves some historiographic aspect of the literature. This kind of ecotone is suggested by Shawna Ross when she infers that, “Where I do see the productive correlation of modernism and its digital remediation is in the turn to the laboratory as an environment for research, experimentation and innovation” (18).
A knowledge ecotone is an intervening space of integration between two different disciplines; a site where a diversity of knowledge can flourish on a higher level of intensity and breadth. In this regard; “Knowledge so conceived is not a series of self-consistent theories that converges towards an ideal view; it is not a gradual approach to the truth. It is rather an ever increasing ocean of mutually incompatible alternatives, each single theory, each fairy-tale, each myth that is part of the collection forcing the others into greater articulation and all of them contributing, via this process of competition, to the development of our consciousness” (Feyerabend 21). The notion of the ecotone offers a reflective paradigm for a robust interdisciplinary networking between the humanities disciplines and the sciences. In reality, the humanities disciplines do not possess the same institutional power as the sciences, but within its multiple fields, the humanities can support science in creating models that will inspire fresh thinking. As a matter of fact, the humanities have always promoted the cause of science. In reaction to visual information and scientific research, Nicholas King submits that; 
“Cinematic representations of bacteria are not just the basis of scientific advances; they also are interesting to watch on screen. Moreover, they justify the use of cinema as a means of conveying information. While nineteenth-century scientists may have discovered how to see disease, twentieth-century cinema allows us—the audience—to also see disease, in a way that written words, oral descriptions, and still pictures cannot. So, in a sense, this is a story not only about the advent of modern medical technologies but also modern representational technologies. The modern is what can be seen; it is also the act of seeing and the technology of sight” (194)
The humanities have the power of narrative, and narrative is important in the consciousness of the public. Digital humanities have helped to create interactive epidemiological mapping system in which the constant geography and spread of epidemic like Covid-19 is related. The visual perspectives in this regard work to enhance scientific textual narrative of the pandemic. Priscilla Wald advances further that, “Fictional accounts of outbreaks did more than reflect and convey the lessons of science; they also supplied some of the most common points of reference, which influence social transformation and diseases emergence in their own right” (31). Scholars like Latour, Foucault, Drucker, Derrida etc., have emphasized the humanistic analysis of the relation of science to the society with the proof that science cannot sustain itself within the society without leaning on the power of other factors, most times inherent in other disciplines whose integration have promoted the cause of science. There is no way science can affirm its knowledge claim without negotiating with the instruments of culture, politics and economics, which are in the disciplinary province of the humanities and the social sciences. Bruno Latour emphasizes in We Have Never Been Modern that, “The more science is absolutely pure, the more it is intimately bound up with the fabric of society” (43). In an earlier work; Science in Action: How to Follow Scientist and Engineers through Society, Latour comes down in plain language to assert that, “Without the enrolment of many other people, without the subtle tactics that symmetrically adjust human and non-human resources, the rhetoric of science is powerless” (145). This means that science is of no consequence if it exhibits its nuances only in its own space. In effect, the conscious creation of boundaries to fence off other disciplines discredits the optimal epistemic utility which can be derived from the integration of assortments of intellectual enquiry. Like Drucker (2018) rightly states; “Disciplinary boundaries do not advance our knowledge of processes unless the work of one domain is brought to bear upon another” (24). The evidence of these quality opinions can be seen in the mutually transformative alliances between the humanities, sciences, technology and arts, which have led to robust production of new knowledge and prototypical collections in the area of digital humanities. Specifically, the areas of artificial intelligence and computer games design would be less effective without the powerful impact of storytelling and creative arts ethics within their technology.


Conclusion

It is important to point out that there are limitations in this prototypical experiment. For one, the designer is new to the Twine tool, and as such sophisticated progress could not be made to enrich the visual experience of the project. Though the evaluation may personally not be bad, some sense of peer-review value should be mounted on experiment in other to break the barrier of epistemic boundary which disciplines like the sciences are always inclined to. In their argument for prototypes, Galey and Ruecker state that, “Whether or not a prototype idea is substantive is somewhat harder to determine. It rests on the potential significance of the design both in terms of intellectual importance and practical value. It is not always possible to evaluate such factors with any precision, especially early in the process. This is, however, equally true for conventional scholarship” (413). While it is aesthetically beneficial to represent a dramatic work on Twine in a visually aesthetic manner, care must be taken not to turn the exercise into a storyboard of tangled interconnected web which can become convoluted and unwieldy for others to comprehend. It must not be an arduous task for others to navigate their way through the story. A Twine presentation of a drama should be a kind of branched but connected story of the drama, where an aspect of the story encounters another as a sub-set of each other.






Works Cited
Beckett, Samuel. Waiting for Godot. Grove Press, 1954.

Christie, Alex and Katie Tanigawa. “Mapping Modernism’s Z-Axis: A Model for Spatial Analysis in Modernist Studies”, Reading Modernism with Machines: Digital Humanities and Modernist Literature, Shawna Ross and James O’Sullivan (eds.). Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 79-107, 2016.

Drucker, Johanna. “Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface”, Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 7 no. 1, pp. 1-43, 2013.
…………  The General Theory of Social Relativity. The Elephants Ltd, 2018.

Feyerabend, Paul. Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge. New Left Books, 1975. 

Ford, Melissa. Writing Interactive Fiction with Twine. QUE Publications, 2016.

Galey, Alan, and Stan Ruecker. “How a Prototype Argues”, Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol. 25 no. 4, pp. 405-424, 2010.

Hammond, Adam, et al. “Modeling Modernist Dialogism: Close Reading with Big Data”, Reading Modernism with Machines: Digital Humanities and Modernist Literature, Shawna Ross and James O’Sullivan (eds.). Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 49-77, 2016.

Hayles, Katherine. Writing Machine. The MIT Press, 2002.

King, Nicholas. “Mediating Panic: The Iconography of “New” Infectious Threats, 1936–2009”. Empires of Panic: Epidemics and Colonial Anxieties, Robert Peckham (ed.). Hong Kong University Press, pp. 181-201, 2015.

Latour, Bruno. Science in Action: How to follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Harvard University Press, 1987.

…………….  We have never been Modern (trans. Catherine Porter). Harvard University Press, 1993.

Levy, Eric. “False Innocence in Waiting for Godot”, Journal of Beckett Studies, vol. 3 no. 2, pp 19-36, 1994.

Ross, Shawna. “Introduction”, Reading Modernism with Machines: Digital Humanities and Modernist Literature, Shawna Ross and James O’Sullivan (eds.). Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 1-13, 2016.

Ryan, Marie-Laure. “From Narrative Games to Playable Stories: Toward a Poetics of Interactive Narrative”, Storyworlds: A Journal of Narrative Studies, Vol. 1, pp. 43-59, 2009. 

Saussure, Ferdinand. Cours de Linguistique Generale/Course in General Linguistics. Duckworth,   1983.

Wald, Priscilla. Contagious: Cultures, Carriers, and the Outbreak Narrative. Duke University Press, 2008.)


